---
layout: post
title:  "IR GS15 - Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM)"
date:   2016-03-09 22:49:00
categories: instrument-training
---

ADM is a systematic approach to understanding and modifying the mental process used by pilots to determine the best course of action in any given circumstance. Some of the main aspects are:

 1. Identifying [hazardous attitudes][ha]
 2. Learning and applying [behaviour modification][ha] techniques
 3. Learning how to recognize and cope with stress (eg. telling ATC to stand by)
 4. Developing risk assessment skills
 5. Using all resources
 6. Evaluating the effectiveness of your own ADM skills

ADM helps minimize the probability of pilot error by providing a way to analyze changes that occur in flight and evaluate how they could affect the outcome of the flight.

It's important to have a systematic way to remember the different parts of flying that need to be considered, which is where the **P.A.V.E.** acronym comes in:

 - **P**ilot: experience, currency and recent flight experience, physical and emotional condition. IMSAFE.
 - **A**ircraft: familiarity with the airplane, properly equipped for the flight (eg. lights for night flight), W&B, altitude clearance vs. service ceiling
 - En**V**ironment: current ceiling and visibility, enroute weather, forecast, winds at departure and destination airports
 - **E**xternal Pressures: get-there-itis, friends waiting at destination, airplane rental window

[ha]: [http://ir.peterussell.me/instrument-training/2016/03/01/hazardous-thought-patterns.html]

# D.E.C.I.D.E.

One of the most useful ADM risk assessment tools is the 'DECIDE' model, a framework for constantly detecting, evaluating, and responding to risks in flight.

 - **D**etect: figure out whether a change has occurred (eg. ice building on wings), or hasn't occurred when it should have (eg. RPM doesn't change when you move the throttle)
 - **E**valuate: decide whether the change/lack of change requires a response, and if so, how quickly
 - **C**hoose: determine what the ultimate desirable outcome is (eg. diverting safely to the nearest airport, getting rid of the ice, or stopping it from accumulating)
 - **I**dentify: figure out what actions are needed to get to the outcome you chose in the previous step
 - **D**o: make the changes you've decided on
 - **E**valuate: determine whether the changes you made have had the desired outcome (eg. did climbing above the cloud layer stop the ice build-up?)

At this point, the model should be repeated to figure out what the next course of action is. For example, if you climbed above a cloud layer to avoid ice, now use the DECIDE model to figure out what to do next - will you need to descend through the layer, divert to an alternate, are the cloud tops climbing?
