---
layout: post
title:  "IR GS20 - Holds"
date:   2016-03-12 17:41:00
categories: instrument-training
---

# Motivation

Holds exist for two reasons:

   1. they give ATC a way to stop an airplane in midair
   2. they're used for lost communication, where you're cleared to a point and can Expect Further Clearance (EFC) at a given time. The rules say that if you lose comms, hold at the clearance limit until the EFC time, then continue on the route. This means controllers know what to expect, and can clear a route for you.

# Basics of Holds

 - holds are shaped like a race track in the air
 - default turns are **to the right** (non-standard is to the left)
 - based on a navigational point: intersection, navaid, DME fix, or waypoint
 - consist of an **inbound** and **outbound** leg

**Inbound Leg**

 - this is the leg you fly *toward* the hold fix
 - the aim is to make the inbound leg...
   - **1 minute** if *at or below* 14,000' MSL
   - **1 1/2 minutes** if *above* 14,000' MSL

**Outbound Leg**

 - begins after you cross the holding fix and completed a 180 degree turn
 - for the initial outbound, start timing either abeam the holding fix, or when wings roll level, and time for 1 minute (or 1 1/2 above 14'000' MSL)
 - after the time elapses, make a 180 degree turn to the inbound leg

Continue the hold until advised by ATC or regulations.

# Holding Clearance

The following instructions must either be stated or implied in the hold clearance:

 - the holding position (clearance limit?), VOR, navaid, etc.
 - a radial, course, or bearing on which to hold (eg. "the 150 radial")
 - a direction to hold in, eg. N, E, SE, SW, W, ..
 - length of legs, in time (or distance if using DME or RNAV)
 - direction of turns
 - time to Expect Further Clearance (EFC)

# 1 Minute Inbound Legs

Becaues the first leg flown after reaching the fix is the *outbound* leg, this is why we fly it for 1 minute (1 1/2 etc.) on the outbound. Once we turn inbound, we time the inbound leg and see whether it takes 1 minute to reach the fix again.

If there's no wind this should work out perfectly, which is a less common situation. Instead, we need to take the amount of time over or under 1 minute on the inbound leg and add or subtract it to the outbound leg, resulting in the next inbound leg being 1 minute.

*Example:* we fly a 1 minute outbound leg and make a 180 degree turn toward the holding fix. We then time the inbound leg and note it's 1:10, ie. 10 seconds longer than we want. It means we have a *headwind* on the inbound leg and a *tailwind* on the outbound leg. Therefore we subtract the 10 seconds from the next outbound leg and fly it for 50 seconds. If all works well, our next inbound leg should then be 1 minute.

# Timed Approaches from a Holding Pattern

The reason we fly a known time in the hold is so that if we need to *leave* the hold at a known time we know how much shorter to cut the outbound leg in order to arrive at the fix at the correct time.

This is a technique used in *Timed Approaches*. An example could be multiple airplanes holding at the outer marker, stacked vertically on top of each other. One at a time the controller will give each airplane a time to leave their hold (often bottom airplane first).

The requirements for timed approaches are:

 - a control tower is in operation at the airport the timed approaches are being made to
 - direct communications are maintained between the approach controller and pilot until the pilot's told to contact the tower
 - if more than one missed approach exists, none require a course reversal
 - if only one missed approach exists, the following are required:
   - does not require course reversal
   - reported ceiling and visibility are equal to or greater than the highest prescribed circling minimums for the approach chats (need to clarify what this means...)
 - when cleared for the approach, pilots shall not execute a procedure turn (ditto...)

# Maximum Speeds

 - **Motivation:** holds are designed to cover a specific area of space, so speed directly affects the amount of distance you cover. Therefore, hold speed restrictions exist, varying by altitude:
 - **6,000' MSL and below:** 200 KIAS
 - **6001' - 14,000' MSL:** 230 KIAS
 - **14,001' MSL and above:** 265 KIAS

You should slow below the maximum speed within three minutes (ie. not insanely early)
