---
layout: post
title:  "IR GS14 - Crew/Cockpit Resource Management (CRM)"
date:   2016-03-08 23:24:00
categories: instrument-training
---

CRM is using all resources available to you as PIC. These can be a copilot, ATC, or hardware in the cockpit. CRM can be used by both single and multi-pilot crews. The following topics are related to CRM.

# Human Resources
   - All people you work with to plan and execute the flight. Weather briefers, maintenance personnel, line crew, copilots, ATC, other pilots.
   - Example: asking a copilot to tune frequences, find charts, monitor performance
   - improper use of copilots is one of the reasons pilots fail checkrides on multi-pilot airplanes

# Hardware Resources
   - knowing how to use the equipment in the airplane, when to use it, and when *not* to use it
   - Example: the G1000 is a great tool for situational awareness, but dangerous with lack of proficiency
   - autopilot can be an excellent CRM tool if used correctly and monitored properly

# Effective Communication in CRM

There are three steps to verifying that you're communicating effectively (increasing in intensity):

  - *Inquiry*: ask copilot, ATC, etc. gather relevant information
  - *Advocacy*: explain and justify your position if necessary
  - *Assertion*: ultimately, the PIC needs to make and enforce the final decision, but with justification

# Information Workload

 - IFR pilots, especially in single-pilot operations, can only handle so much at a given time
 - it's important not to get overloaded with navigation, aviation, ATC, situational awareness etc.
 - use 'Standby' to let ATC know you can't talk to them right now, preventing mistakes and repitition

**Managing Workload**

 - any time there's a lull, always be thinking about what the next two things are:
   - are there any new nav or comm frequencies that could be tuned
   - can we get the ATIS early at destination
 - this helps reduce workload during busier phases, especially if unexpected situations occur (emergencies etc.)
 - always ensure the safe outcome of the flight first. For example, if you get too busy on an approach you can always go missed and attempt the approach again
