---
layout: post
title:  "IR GS21 - Holds (2)"
date:   2016-03-14 09:30:00
categories: instrument-training
---

# DME/GPS "Mileage Legs" Holding

This is a variation where the hold is on a specific course (typically a VOR course) with the outbound leg identified by mileage values.

With a VOR, you could be asked to 'Hold East of the XYZ VOR with 5 mile legs'. In this case you would begin the outbound leg and fly it until the DME reads 5NM from the holding fix.

It's important to note that the holding fix *itself* could be a DME value from the VOR as well. In that case you'd fly to the DME fix, then simply add the leg length to the DME value for the outbound leg. For example: 'Hold 12 DME West of the ABC VOR, 4 mile legs'. In this case you'd start the outbound turn at 12 DME, fly the outbound leg, then begin the turn to the inbound leg at 12NM + 4NM = 16 DME from the VOR.

When using **GPS** instead of DME values, you use something called **ATD** or *Along Track Distance*. You simply use the GPS to figure out where the start and end of each leg should be using distance values.

For example, if ATC asked you to hold on a specific course and fly 7 mile legs, then you'd simply get onto the track, look at your position, fly for 7NM, then begin the next turn.

# Holding Pattern Drift Correction

 - you can identify what the wind drift correction is during the inbound leg: you'll be tracking the VOR or other course, so the wind correction needed to maintain that course gives you the wind correction angle.
 - it's recommended to **double** the correction on the outbound leg (in the opposite direction, since you're going the other way) - the FAR/AIM apparently says to triple it. This keeps you well on the protected side. You may need to adjust your turn radius to intercept the inbound leg correctly.

# Working out a Hold: Step By Step

We'll work through this example clearance:

 > " Cessna 2132 Bravo, radar contact one mile north of HOFED intersection. Cleared to WRAPS intersection via heading three-four-zero degrees, intercept Victor 244 direct WRAPS. Hold east on Victor 244, left turns. Maintain eight thousand feet. Expect further clearance at zero-two-three-zero."

* (Note: V-244 is on the 068 radial from the Manteca VOR)*

**Step 1: Getting to the hold**

The first step is determining how to get to the hold. In this case we fly heading 340, then intercept Victor 244. Once intercepted, we fly V-244 to the WRAPS intersection.

**Step 2: Order**

Aviate, Navigate, Communicate - in that order. Once you've figured out how to get to the hold, get the airplane set up in the right direction and trimmed etc. before worrying about the hold itself. It's important not to get caught up trying to figure out or draw the hold before you're established on the course to the hold.

**Step 3: Draw the Holding Pattern**

This will become automatic with experience and won't require drawing the hold on a chart, but for now you want to draw it on the IFR chart (probably in pencil..). The steps to successfully draw the hold are:

 1. find the fix that you're going to hold at
   - *in our example we're holding at the WRAPS intersection*
 2. figure out which side of the fix you're going to hold at (it's a 50-50 call)
   - *in our example we're holding EAST of WRAPS, so the inbound course will be 248 degrees)*
   - note that the side of the intersection refers to the **inbound leg**, the turns may affect whether this is accurate for the *whole* hold, but consider the inbound leg when choosing the side of the fix to hold on
 3. determine the direction of turns. **Standard turns are right turns** - if ommitted then you'll use right turns
   - *in our example the controller explicitly specified left turns*


