---
layout: post
title:  "IR GS28 - Distance Measuring Equipment (DME)"
date:   2016-03-21 21:33:00
categories: instrument-training
---

DME is equipment which provides nautical mile distances from many VOR stations. It usually displays groundspeed as well.

It operates by sending out paired pulses with a specific time spacing. The pulses are received at the ground station, which then transmits paired pulses back to the aircraft at the same pulse spacing but on a different frequency. The round trip time for the signal exchange is measured in the airborne DME unit and translated into distance from the ground station.

 - DME can be associated with other nav facilites, like ILS/DME, or LOC/DME
 - DME operates in the ultrahigh frequency (UHF) spectrum, between 962 MHz and 1213 Mhz
 - not all VOR stations have DME, but ones that do are given away by the fact that they specify a UHF frequency with the information box for the station, eg. 'Ch 77'
 - the types of VORs with DME capabilities:
   - VORTAC (VOR/TACAN)
   - VOR/DME
   - pure TACAN stations do provide DME, but are usually only used by military equipment (there's more information on the book on how you might use it via frequency pairing, but I'll leave that for now)

**Identifying Whether DME is operational at a VOR**

 - the DME equipment emits a tone along with the VOR or localizer identifier. It is:
   - higher pitched than the VOR or localizer identifier tone
   - only occurs once every 3 or 4 VOR tones
 - if you hear only a lower VOR or localizer ID tone with no higher tone, the DME equipment is not operating
 - similarly, if you hear *only* a high pitch ID tone about every 30 seconds, then the DME is operating but the VOR or localizer is not

**DME Slant Range Mileage**

 - the DME equipment in the airplane is both a horizontal distance, *and* a vertical distance from the DME
 - therefore, the DME is actually measuring the **slant range mileage**
 - this is a straight line between the airplane and the DME ground equipment - it is *slightly larger* than the horizontal component from the DME ground equipment to the spot on earth under the airplane
 - *Example: at 6000' over the DME station, the DME would read 1 mile (6000' ~ 1 mile)*
 - the error is greatest over the station, and becomes negligible the further from the station you go

**Three Ways of Determining Position with DME**

 1. use the DME and radial from the same station, eg. 10 NM on the 130 radial
 2. use the radial from one VOR and DME from a different station, eg. 5NM from BAD VOR on the 200 radial from LCB VOR
 3. use two DME arcs from two different stations (it seems like this would have at least two different possible positions you could be in - ie. the arcs intersect in two places. Might want to check that)


